# DML

Now that I have somewhat functional DDL, REPL, and a very rough storage layer,
it's time to think about DML implementation.

Unfortunately, DML has dragons everywhere. It's the crown jewel of a DBMS, with
all the weight of the crown. It would be nice to simplify it until I can start
small.

Looking at the original milestone roadmap, I have sidestepped indexes and
page managers entirely. There is a table file with a schema. This is enough to
build a minimal-viable-DML-implementation that uses full scan. After all, other
layers of database can be attached when the DML can actually utilize it, which
I expect that would take quite a long time.

.... But the "minimal viable DML implementation" itself is a lot. DML inherently
invites expressions, because the user must be able to request specific data
on the database, and raw columns itself doesn't do anything. Even a simple
`id = 1` is expression. Therefore, it could be said that the simplest DML
implementation requires some kind of expression evaluation.

Meaning, it has to start from building an expression engine. It doesn't have to
do anything fancy, but it must be able to express columns, values, and operators.
Which is honestly everything, if we ignore subqueries or aggregation queries,
which I can't possibly implement as of now.

The expression engine shall be designed by specifying the target grammar, AST,
then preferably AI-generated parser, then AST-based evaluation engine. Any
mention of bytecode or stack machine should be disregarded as intrusive thought.

A thought about SQL's pesky NULL behavior though - since that's a known problem
to me, I've dealt with that before, I think it's reasonable enough to implement
that from the beginning.

After implementing an expression engine, I can implement SELECT.
It's simply a matter of looping through the table, running a filter on WHERE
clause if exists, running a sort on ORDER BY clause if exists. A "query plan"
isn't necessary simply to loop over a single table.

The "rows viewer" on the terminal should be implemented afterwards as well,
even a CSV qualifies. It's probably not worth mentioning, but it is a
requirement.

After having that, it would be relatively trivial to implement INSERT, DELETE
and UPDATE because the same core can be used to retrieve the right rows, and
the data structure already assumes fixed-size rows, append-only tablefile with
tombstone-marker.
Possibly a static variant of INSERT must be implemented before anything, because
I can't test anything with an empty table.

At this point, a minimal DML has been achieved. It could store rows, retrieve
rows, modify rows, and delete rows. Further things invite dragons.

But - as a toy database, it would be reasonable to invite a naive JOIN. O(n^m)
level madness, a cartesian join every single time, but now it functions as
a RDBMS at that point. It's not even horribly difficult to implement that.

Then, and only then, when I have a functional DML with zero query plans
whatsoever, it would now be reasonable to implement B+tree again. Because
indexes can be finally used, and that naturally invites query plan.

To summarize, the plan would be in this order:

- SQL expression/DML grammar
- SQL expression/DML AST design
- SQL expression/DML parser
- Static INSERT query
- SELECT \* query with row scanner
- SQL expression column name binder / evaluator
- SELECT query (just expressions)
- SELECT FROM query
- SELECT FROM WHERE query
- UPDATE, DELETE query
- SELECT FROM WHERE ORDER BY query
- SELECT FROM WHERE ORDER BY query, FROM allowing multiple tables by cartesian join
- SELECT FROM JOIN WHERE ORDER BY query
- INSERT INTO SELECT query
- Finally think about indexes and query plans
