# Thoughts about MiniDB

## Preamble

Almost a decade ago, I was thinking about databases a lot, specifically about
OLTP query execution, and designed a lot of things but a query planner.
The project was called "linsql", and it was, well, started as a LINQ equivalent
for JavaScript. Then it went into query execution. Then B-trees. Then query
planners. Then it was too much to grasp.

This is the example of what linsql wanted to do:

```js
let result = linq`
SELECT a, b FROM ${list}
WHERE c = 1 OR d = 1
ORDER BY a ASC;`;
```

```js
// Performs hash join
let result = linq`
SELECT list.name, list2.name FROM ${list} list
JOIN ${list2} list2 ON list.id = list2.id;`;
```

Of course, it remains as a concept without a functioning code. But the
implementation had parser, SQL expression evaluator, SARG finder, all the
execution iterators and whatnot. Then I hit the query planner wall, which was
unfairly complicated to the teenager brain.

Few years later, after getting a job, eventually I decided that this was in
vain - actual enterprises need locks, consistency, effectively all of ACID,
which necessitates locks, transactions, and all the boring stuff.

However, I was building game engines, specifically, ECS frameworks, and
eventually thought about memory structure, cache coherence, multithreading, all
the nasty things that eventually loops back into databases. I was focused about
implementing renderers, and implemented things like deferred rendering,
armatures, and somehow ray tracing, .... and yes, the editor. The "editor"
itself was a ridiculous exercise on its own, because the train of thought became
ridiculous in retrospect. Long story short, I started on web, web had React,
I wanted React on C++, therefore I ended up writing a CSS layout engine, which
happened to be a web browser. Ultimately I lost some interest on that project,
but I wish to revisit that some time later.

But this is getting off-topic fast. I thought it might be a good idea to
revisit databases after all of this projects, that rhymes with all the system
programming concepts. Because everything is a database if you squint hard. I
hate that sentence, but somehow that's true.

Specifically, I dabbled with SQL databases a lot in the past, but surprisingly
(or unsuprisingly) there are very few documents about database internals.
They tend to delve into MVCCs, page management, schedulers, etc, but what I've
been wondering is the gritty details - how the statements are actually explored
and expanded into low-level query plans, etc. I could have read the source code,
but I wasn't fluent at C/C++ back then. After all, learning by doing tends to
be absurdly effective at learning concepts. Not probably the most effective way.

So, a reboot of the database engine. The objective is to
"learn database internals", let's not pretend there is anything practical about
this.

## Language

I wonder what would be the best language to do this? I think TypeScript remains
the best for exploration, because it doesn't need to be fast, and frankly,
C++/Rust or other native languages remain unwieldy because memory management is
a huge beast. However - however - JavaScript remains in the single-threaded
realm, and databases are all about being multithreaded. The schedulers are
inevitable concepts, and that itself is underexplored by me because, well,
everything I do was JavaScript. It IS possible to explore multithreading using
SharedArrayBuffer, but it remains ridiculous because they're not JSON, they're
just raw memory - making binary serialization INSIDE the process necessary.
That is yet another rabbit hole, that C structs just solve by being C.

So... while I thought about using TypeScript for simplicity and ease of use,
maybe C++ is a better choice for this. Why not Rust? Rust is also good, but I'm
more familar with C++ than Rust at this point. Also Rust has rigid memory
lifetime checkers, which is actually great for production projects. However it
is yet another constraint that will take me a significant time to solve,
meanwhile in C++, I could just use memory dangerously on purpose to simplify
the design. A heresy, yes, but can be reasonable for experiments.

So it's settled, it's C++, but the scope of "MiniDB" still remains undefined.

## Plan

I think a roadmap is inevitable, but let's just write a bucket list for now:

- SQL parser
- Storage engine
  - Serialization layer (or, more like Cap'n Proto approach)
  - B-trees, indexes, filesystem storage
  - In-memory tables
  - Page manager
  - In-memory page manager (??)
- DML
  - Query planner
  - Query executor
- DDL
  - Table catalog manager
- Scheduler
  - (Because database queries rhyme with green threads and C++ doesn't give it for free)
  - Still, let's not think about multithreading for now. It's just a list of active tasks
  - (... I have very conflicted feelings about blocking I/O here, lol)
  - (... Okay, blocking I/O is very much reasonable, so no scheduler for now)
- (Much, much later) Transaction manager
  - Locks, undo logs, etc
  - WAL
  - eventually MVCC
  - TCL
  - But for initial prototype a global mutex will suffice
- REPL for debugging

That's pretty much it, I guess. It's not "pretty much it", it's the entire
database.

Now let's evaluate the scope...

SQL parsers consumed so much time in the past to write, but parsers are solved
problems, and in 2026 we have AI coding agents. It'd be better to ask an AI
to write the parser, like a magic black box that spits out an AST.

The whole point of linsql was DML, and the DML is the final boss that has a
nasty habit of bringing the entire query planner inside. It's a terrible idea
to set DML as the first goal. After all, DMLs need a database catalog to
operate.

Therefore, implementing DDLs would be a better first goal - database catalog is
strictly necessary for everything else, it doesn't require a query planner on
its own. It doesn't even need storage layers, B-trees, or anything.
Basically the husk of database engines can be realized quickly. It's
a quick win, involving parsers, REPL, catalog. So I should do that first.

So the first milestone will be this:

1. SQL parser
2. Table catalog manager
3. REPL
4. DDL implementation
5. `.tables`, `.schema` commands
6. Indexes (with no real implementation, just the shell)

Then this, a totally achievable goal, I assume:

1. Page manager and the ".db" file
2. Making the page manager less dumb with in-memory cache manager and refcount
3. Binary representation of the table catalog
4. Persisting the table catalog to disk using pages

Then let's realize the beast slowly.

1. Binary AND code representation of the rows
   - Never forget about the cursed logic of NULL in SQL, which is nothing like programming languages
2. Binary representation of the B+Tree nodes
3. B+Tree, B+Tree iterators, with C++ templates allowing arbitrary in-memory page manager for testing
   - That C++ template part was probably unnecessary, but well, it's not the worst yak to shave
4. The actual implementation of tables and indexes
   - Should the table be a B+Tree? ... I could, but probably not necessary for now
     - Why do I hear VACUUM dragons? B+Tree makes VACUUM a bit trivial to implement
     - It's a whole design decision, that MSSQL said YES to cluster index and PostgreSQL seems to say NO
     - That's a guess, but still, okay, not bringing B+Tree and friends seem wise, they shall be banished to indexes
5. INSERT statement, with raw rows only
   - Checking if indices and tables did their job
6. SELECT statement, no join, no where, just "dump everything"
   - Checking if tables did their job but really

Now it stores data. Actually stores them. Here goes the cursed beast...

1. SQL expression evaluator
   - No optimization, no anything, just returns value
2. SELECT statement, now with WHERE, by doing full scan and checking if the expression returned truthy values
   - Intentionally keep it dumb please, otherwise I immediately summon the query planner
3. SELECT statement, now with ORDER BY, not by indexes but running sort afterwards
   - Also, avoiding the query planner dragon

.... This alone will take some time, so I think it's reasonable to stop pondering and revisit it later.
