# DML Binder

It's time to think about SQL expression execution model, which involves
connecting the AST and the table values. This is kinda tricky because there are
four different things I need to connect:

- AST data type
- Table data type
- Row data value
- Runtime data value

Okay, more like three, because rows can directly return the runtime data value
that the evaluator uses. Still, there's some concerns before moving on to
implementing the binder, which itself is a question too.

- What even is a runtime data value?
- Can rows or functions return dynamic data type?
- How should a "resolved AST" and dependencies be expressed on the data model?

Also, there's some thought in the corner yelling to make a bytecode, going
"`and $0, $1; ret $0` is so beautiful, isn't it?". Some idea is valid, but
I'd rather have a recursive evaluator because otherwise I end up creating
one more representation model when I really want to have less.

## Runtime data value

But first of all, I need to figure out what "runtime data value" means first.
It'll be the basis of all runtime engine, ideally the format the row iterator
uses, which means the evaluator would also use. Currently, the row is expressed
as `std::vector<std::variant<...>>`, which works, but it may be not an ideal
format.

But then again, I can't think of a better one. This is effectively equivalent
to creating a programming language - it literally is - and the need is pretty
much equivalent to making bunch of classes going `IntegerValue`, `StringValue`,
etc, that can hold the value and additional useful information.

There are probably three approaches to do this in C++, one is going full OOP
and virtual classes - which may not be tolerable for high-performance
applications, which is the case for databases, but it's negligible for now.
One is just using `std::variant` like it's done right now.
One is COM VARIANT sadness that gives you unions and `void*`.

I think a good compromise is just keep using `std::variant` as it is preferred
for modern C++ development, but using a wrapper struct to give it a structure
to contain additional information should I have them.

For instance, something like this:

```cpp
struct NullValue {};

struct IntegerValue {
  std::int64_t value;
};

using Value = std::variant<IntegerValue, NullValue>;
```

## Bound value

Before even defining the binder, I need to figure out how I should store the
bound value, and attach it to the evaluator.

It could be done by walking and rewriting the AST, replacing the bound value
as `BoundExpr` with an index referencing the "input" array containing actual
table/row names.

```cpp
struct BoundIdentifierExpr {
  std::uint32_t index;
};

struct BoundIdentifierReference {
  std::string table_name;
  std::string column_name;
  Table * table;
  std::uint32_t index;
};

struct ExprContext {
  std::vector<BoundIdentifierReference> bound_identifiers;
};

// The processed AST should be devoid of IdentitiferExpr entirely
// Also I should do something about function calls as well..
```

This immediately makes me concerned about how the binder would be implemented,
because it needs to do a lot of jobs at once - deduping identifiers, resolving
ambiguities, etc. Unfortunately this is just a bit complicated I guess...

## Binder

So about the binder implementation. It would just walk over the AST, replace
all the `IdentifierExpr` with `BoundIdentifierExpr`. I think it would be a
good idea to implement a general purpose AST walker, so that I won't have to
repeat implementing AST walker so many times. A crude idea would be something
like this, in JS because I don't need suffering in pseudocode:

```js
// Could be used for evaluation, like this crude way, obviously terrible
walkPostorder(expr, (expr) => {
  if (expr.type === 'add') {
    assert(expr.left.type === 'numericLiteral');
    assert(expr.right.type === 'numericLiteral');
    return { type: 'numericLiteral', value: expr.left.value + expr.right.value };
  }
});
// Or
walkPostorder(expr, (expr) => {
  if (expr.type === 'identifier') {
    // Do all the binder things
    return { type: 'boundIdentifier', ... };
  }
})
```

Then the walking part gets trivial, and it's outside the scope of the binder.

So about the binder itself - it can get information about:

- What tables are involved in the `FROM`
- .... That's it

... Yes, everything must begin from resolving the table references itself,
which should be quite trivial - it just needs to point the actual table objects,
something like `std::vector<Table*>`.
Then it can begin registering the "namespace" of the tables, for instance,
`std::map<std::string, Table*>`. Alias must be used in here if specified.
Then, it can begin registering the namespace of the columns, which can be
dubious in so many circumstances. Regardless, a variable going
`std::map<std::string, std::vector<std::pair<Table*, std::uint32_t>>` would be
fine, and if any of the `IdentifierExpr` references dubious entry, an error
can be raised.

```cpp
std::vector<Table*> tables;
// An index would be a better option than dealing with raw pointers everywhere
std::map<std::string, std::uint32_t> table_namespace_map;
std::map<std::string, std::vector<std::pair<std::uint32_t, std::uint32_t>>> column_namespace_map;
```

Once that's fulfilled, pretty much all the references in anywhere can be
resolved with the map..... IF only WHERE and SELECT list existed.

Unfortunately, SQL secretly has a concept of lifetimes and whatnot - ORDER BY
can reference columns that are defined in SELECT, while simulatenously allowing
columns in some cases. So clearly I need more pondering about how this can
be implemented. The original plan exploded.

### Lifetime, yes, lifetime

Unfortunately I can no longer pretend SQL is some kind of a simple expression
language; a single query can go through many phases, and some variables are
revealed as you progress, some variables get hidden, etc.

For instance, see the following query:

```sql
SELECT price * 1.1 AS applied_price
FROM products
WHERE price > 1000
ORDER BY applied_price DESC;
```

Where does `applied_price` come from? Can one use `applied_price` in WHERE? No.
Before any explanation, a SELECT query would get executed in the following order:

- FROM & JOIN - gather rows from the tables
- WHERE - filter rows
- GROUP BY - aggregate rows
- HAVING - filter aggregated rows
- SELECT - map rows (projection)
- DISTINCT - dedupe rows
- ORDER BY - sort rows

Keep that in mind, because this is exactly where the lifetime dragon lives in.
That is, SELECT can manifest new columns out of thin air. Since WHERE and JOIN
gets executed before SELECT, they cannot reference any columns that is specified
in WHERE.

ORDER BY, naturally, resides after SELECT, and therefore it's free to use
columns from there. I could go deeper if I involve aggregation functions and
`DISTINCT`, but that's not the scope I want to deal with right now.

However, ORDER BY can also reference columns that does NOT exist in SELECT.
Take the following example:

```sql
SELECT price * 1.1 AS applied_price
FROM products
WHERE price > 1000
ORDER BY product_name DESC;
```

Where did `product_name` come from? It came from `products` table, but why?
SQL allows referencing "hidden" columns, that doesn't show up in the final set
but can regardless participate in the query. We need to take account for that,
and the planner, if I somehow manage to build one in the future, also needs to
pull them.

... Since aggregation exhibits behaviors that can "delete" the rows, we need to
think about that as well. Let's just take a minimal example, though I'm not
going to implement that right away.

```sql
-- Anything but product_category is unavailable as in non-aggregated function here
SELECT product_category, AVG(price) * 1.1 AS applied_price
FROM products
WHERE price > 1000 AND product_name LIKE 'ABC%'
-- applied_price is still unavailable here, because it's executed before SELECT
GROUP BY product_category
-- now product_name is unavailable past this point, because aggregation deleted it
HAVING AVG(price) > 1500
-- applied_price is available because SELECT is now done
ORDER BY applied_price DESC;
```

... It made it stupidly complicated, since aggregation invites whole new other
behavior that's not observed in regular SELECT queries.

- FROM `products`
- WHERE `products.price > 1000 AND products.product_name LIKE 'ABC%'`
- GROUP BY `products.product_category`
  - output columns: `products.product_category`, `AVG(price)`
  - nothing survives past this point because GROUP BY removes everything else
- HAVING `AVG(price) > 1500`
- SELECT `products.product_category`, `AVG(price) * 1.1 AS applied_price`
- ORDER BY `applied_price` DESC

Given this information, let's try to manually build an "ideal form" of the
SELECT statement first, for the case of non-aggregation SELECT:

```js
{
  from: ['products'],
  // Columns needed for where
  where_deps: ['products.price'],
  where: 'products.price > 1000',
  // Columns needed for projection
  column_deps: ['products.price'],
  columns: [
    { name: 'applied_price', expr: 'products.price * 1.1' },
  ],
  // Columns needed for post-projection, yet does not appear in the final rows
  order_by_deps: ['products.product_name'],
  order_by: [
    { expr: 'products.product_name', direction: 'DESC' },
  ],
}
```

And now for the aggregation case:

```js
{
  from: ['products'],

  where_deps: ['products.price', 'products.product_name'],
  where: 'products.price > 1000 AND products.product_name LIKE %ABC%',

  // GROUP BY destroys anything not specified in "group_by" or "group_aggregation"
  group_deps: ['products.product_category', 'products.price'],
  group_by: ['products.product_category'],
  group_aggregation: ['AVG(products.price)'],

  having_deps: ['AVG(products.price)'],
  having: 'AVG(products.price) > 1500',

  column_deps: ['products.price'],
  columns: [
    { name: 'product_category', expr: 'products.product_category' },
    { name: 'applied_price', expr: 'AVG(products.price) * 1.1' },
  ],

  order_by_deps: ['applied_price'],
  order_by: [
    { expr: 'applied_price', direction: 'DESC' },
  ],
}
```

... I hate SQL. Anyway, few learning points:

- There must be a concept to manage variable dependencies between phases,
  as variables can freely appear and disappear between them. This also means
  that variables must be bound in a specific order, because the row availability
  also depends on the order, future availablity depends on the phase, etc.
- There must be a canonical name for each variable that participates in the
  evaluation. For the former examples I just used table names, which can work
  well enough. But you could have a dictionary and substitute that with `$0`,
  etc, and that would work equally well.
- It could be argued that the binder is directly participating to the query
  planning process, like physical plan, but this is implied in the SQL syntax
  itself, and therefore it always needs to deduce variable dependencies this way
  regardless of how the plan would get executed.
- Subqueries are yet another dragon and I will not look into that abyss today.

Now, I need to think about how this kind of dependencies would get described
without all the hard-coded mess. .... Welcome to the world of scopes.

### Scopes

It could be said that each operation inside a query, while implicit, have their
own scope. For instance, using scopes, it could be explained like this:

```js
{
  const p = tables["products"];
  {
    where(p.price > 1000);
    {
      const applied_price = p.price * 1.1;
      {
        sort(p.product_name, "DESC");
      }
    }
  }
}
```

```js
{
  const p = tables['products'];
  {
    where(p.price > 1000 && p.product_name LIKE 'ABC%');
    {
      group_by(p.product_category);
      {
        // Past this point, nothing is available unless it uses aggregated functions
        having(avg(p.price) > 1500);
        {
          const product_category = p.product_category;
          const applied_price = avg(p.price) * 1.1;
          {
            sort(applied_price, 'DESC');
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Inside a single query (barring subqueries), the scope remains stable -
the only offenders are projection (SELECT) and GROUP BY, which can alter the
scope of future operations.

Therefore, inside a single query, there are exactly three phases that the binder
needs to take account of:

- FROM phase
- GROUP BY (aggregation) phase
- SELECT (projection) phase

With this in mind, the scope can act as an hierarchy, or a stack - just like
how scopes in programming languages work.

### Scope declaration

After this in mind, it's quite clear what a single scope should have. Though
I think actually modeling them as a concrete "scope" is not a great idea,
because there are a lot of pitfalls (hello `ORDER BY 1`), and I don't think I'm
ready to really make the final shape of this.

So, it could just boil down to few variables and functions.

- Which tables are available? Which columns can be addressed without ambiguity?
- Which columns can be referenced without using aggregation functions?
- Which columns are specified by SELECT, in which order?

Let's see a non-generalized architecture for this, going back to the original
"bound value" idea after so much detour.

```cpp
struct FromTableRef {
  std::string name;
  Table* table;
  std::vector<TableColumnRef> columns;
};

struct TableColumnRef {
  std::uint32_t table_index;
  std::string name;
  std::uint32_t index;
};

struct SelectColumnRef {
  std::string name;
  Expr expr;
  std::uint32_t index;
};

using ColumnRef = std::variant<TableColumnRef, SelectColumnRef>;

struct Scope {
  std::vector<FromTableRef> tables;
  std::map<std::string, FromTableRef> tables_map;
  std::map<std::string, std::vector<TableColumnRef>> from_cols_map;
  std::vector<SelectColumnRef> select_cols;
  // If aggregation was used, this marks which expression is valid to survive
  // ... Yes, GROUP BY can use arbitrary expressions, unfortunately
  std::vector<Expr> group_exprs;
};

```

Given that everything is already filled in, we can do something like this to
resolve the canonical reference in each phase:

```cpp
ColumnRef get_column_ref_pre_projection(Identifier& identifier) {
  auto& parts = identifier.parts;
  if (parts.size == 2) {
    auto& table_ref = tables_map.at(parts[0]);
    // Just assume cols_map exist - this is supposed to be a pseudocode
    auto col_ref = table_ref.cols_map.at(parts[1]);
    return col_ref;
  } else if (parts.size == 1) {
    auto& refs = from_cols_map.at(parts[0]);
    if (refs.size > 1) {
      throw std::runtime_error("dubious identifier");
    }
    return refs[0];
  } else {
    throw std::runtime_error("identifier with unknown length");
  }
}

ColumnRef get_column_ref_post_projection(Identifier& identifier) {
  auto& parts = identifier.parts;
  if (parts.size == 1) {
    for (auto& select_col : select_cols) {
      if (select_col.name == parts[0]) {
        return select_col;
      }
    }
  }
  return get_column_ref_pre_projection(identifier);
}
```

Then the same "BoundIdentifierExpr" from the original idea could be used here.

```cpp
struct BoundIdentifierExpr {
  ColumnRef ref;
};
```

However, looking at it again, this is merely symbol resolution - no dependencies
were identified, everything can boil down to a simple string, just resolving
"canonical name" for everything would actually work equally well. No aggregation
were solved, and it's not necessary at the symbol resolution step.

### Dependency resolution

Which is to say, the dependency resolution can occur once there's a mechanism
to track what dependencies are actually used. The simplest one would be just
putting everything inside one vector once `get_column_ref` is triggered while
walking. This also naturally invites the concept of slot.

```cpp
enum class SelectPhase {
  From,
  Select,
  Group,
};

struct RefDependency {
  std::string canonical_name;
  ColumnRef col_ref;
}

struct RefSlot {
  SelectPhase phase;
  std::uint32_t index;
};

struct BoundIdentifierExpr {
  RefSlot slot;
};

RefSlot get_column_slot(Identifier& identifier, SelectPhase phase) {
  // Do things to resolve canoical name...
  std::string canonical_name;
  ColumnRef col_ref;
  int index = ref_deps.index_of(canonical_name);
  if (index == -1) {
    ref_deps.push({ canonical_name, col_ref });
    return { phase, ref_deps.size - 1 };
  }
  return { phase, index };
}
```

The slot, then should contain everything needed to run each expression, which is
very convenient. Everything became `$0 == 'value' AND $1 > 1000` at this point.

Aggregation, though, needs additional consideration to preserve values,
while aggregation functions themselves should become a reference as well.

`AVG(products.price)` itself is referencing to `products.price`, which is
pointing to previous-phase reference. However, `AVG(products.price)` itself
becomes an opaque value after aggregation - hence that itself must become a
reference to a slot. Which is to say, a function call is a reference.

### Intermediate frame layout

At this point, we should have an intermediate SELECT plan with resolved exprs.
Bringing the JS-shaped concept once again:

```sql
SELECT price * 1.1 AS applied_price
FROM products
WHERE price > 1000
ORDER BY 1 DESC, product_name DESC;
```

```js
{
  from: ['products'],
  // references used in FROM phase
  from_refs: ['products.price'],
  where: '$0 > 1000',
  columns: [
    { name: 'applied_price', expr: '$0 * 1.1' },
  ],
  // references used in SELECT phase
  select_refs: ['1', 'products.product_name'],
  order_by: [
    { expr: '$0', direction: 'ASC' },
    { expr: '$1', direction: 'DESC' },
  ],
}
```

With this, now we can build intermediate frame layout for the query. ... It's
just a matter of letting things survive while projection is happening.
Something like this:

```js
{
  from: ['products'],
  // references used in FROM phase
  from_refs: ['products.price', 'products.product_name'],
  where: '$0 > 1000',
  columns: [
    { name: 'applied_price', expr: '$0 * 1.1' },
  ],
  // references used in SELECT phase
  select_refs: ['applied_price', '$1'],
  order_by: [
    { expr: '$0', direction: 'ASC' },
    { expr: '$1', direction: 'DESC' },
  ],
}
```

That is, we can recursively reference each references in `select_refs` on
`from_refs` so that `select_refs` would use `from_refs`. That was awkward thing
to say. But anyway, it's revealed that each phase would work recursively here.

Then, very conveniently, `from_refs` can directly become the intermediate layout
pre-projection phase, then `columns + select_refs` can become the intermediate
layout post-projection phase. That's literally it.

What about the aggregation case?

```sql
SELECT product_category, AVG(price) * 1.1 AS applied_price
FROM products
WHERE price > 1000 AND product_name LIKE 'ABC%'
GROUP BY product_category
HAVING AVG(price) > 1500
ORDER BY applied_price DESC;
```

```js
{
  from: ['products'],
  // FROM phase
  from_refs: [
    'products.price',
    'products.product_name',
    'products.product_category',
    'products.price',
  ],
  where: '$0 > 1000 AND $1 LIKE %ABC%',

  group_by: ['$2'],
  group_refs: ['AVG($3)', '$2'],
  // GROUP phase past this point
  having: '$0 > 1500',
  columns: [
    { name: 'product_category', expr: '$1' },
    { name: 'applied_price', expr: '$0 * 1.1' },
  ],
  // SELECT phase past this point. "applied_price" references column here
  select_refs: ['applied_price'],
  order_by: [
    { expr: '$0', direction: 'DESC' },
  ],
}
```

It's working well enough - you can observe that GROUP BY also needs to perform
projection just to do aggregation.

---

Going back to the non-aggregation case, I think it's way better to pre-populate
the "select_refs" with defined columns, which can basically make `columns` and
`select_refs` equal. That is, `select_refs` IS `columns` with extra data!

```js
{
  from: ['products'],
  // references used in FROM phase
  from_refs: ['products.price', 'products.product_name'],
  where: '$0 > 1000',
  select_refs: [
    { hidden: false, name: 'applied_price', expr: '$0 * 1.1' },
    { hidden: true, expr: '$1' },
  ],
  order_by: [
    { expr: '$0', direction: 'ASC' },
    { expr: '$1', direction: 'DESC' },
  ],
}
```

At this point, `refs` just became equivalent to intermediate frame layout,
which is extremely helpful.

### Conclusion

This has been a ridiculous detour, but I think I found a satisfactory
architecture to implement the binder, then the intermediate frame layout,
then scopes, etc. So much for "the binder"... I'll have to formalize the
architecture in a separate document because this has become definitely not a
straightforward document for now.

## Type system

While it's technically possible to have a fixed type system, it's still way too
early in development to benefit from this. After all, everything blows up when
`json_get` or dynamic functions are introduced, which inevitably summons
dynamic types, so it'd be better to keep it dynamic and let the evaluator
figure out the output type each time. Type failures can be runtime errors
for now, and INSERT INTO SELECT isn't a thing I plan to implement right now.

... Though, it'd be relatively tame to statically derive the types, and it would
be useful once I have a functional DML engine, so that's something to work on.

## Evaluator

With the "intermediate frame layout" in mind, the evaulator has become absurdly
simple - it just has to accept a row filled with values, use `$0` references
directly using the row, and that's it. It couldn't be any simpler.
